Good morning, Roger.
Good morning.
Great. We can hear you.
We can hear you perfectly. So we've got you for 10 minutes
in your hands. Of course, if you'd like to leave some time at the end for some Q&A,
that'd be great.
All right. Well, I'll see how I can go. Thank you.
Well, firstly, thank you for the opportunity to present to you.
The initiative has been looking at the, and researching the
governance of regulatory agencies, including the Commerce Commission,
since 2017.
And we welcome the government's move to reform the governance
of the commission.
Successive surveys have shown that the
commission is
the worst performing of New Zealand's major
regulatory agencies. That's come through in successive
surveys of the performance of
regulatory agencies generally,
and it's
about time that the governance of the commission
was strengthened.
However,
as members of the committee will have seen from our bill,
there are three matters that are important to the performance
of regulatory agencies.
The internal governance structures, so that there's an internal check
on setting regulatory
strategy and the performance of the agency against that strategy, and that's
where the board governance model this bill addresses comes
in.
There's also an issue with appointment processes to New Zealand's
regulatory agencies, and we've recommended
that an independent appointments agency
commission is established following the UK model to
ensure that appointments to regulatory agencies,
their expertise is assessed against a skills matrix so that we've got the right
people on the regulatory agencies.
And
we
submit that that should be an issue this committee looks at,
extending the approach taken in this bill.
So three issues: internal governance, that's the board
governance model; appointment processes;
and external monitoring. And successive
investigations into the performance of regulatory agencies
have shown that the external monitoring of the agencies
implementing complex regulatory regimes is
poorly monitored.
The Productivity Commission concluded that in its 2014 report,
Regulatory Institutions and Practices, and we found the
same thing in our two reports,
Who Guards the Guards in 2018 and Reassessing the Regulators in
2021. And that's a piece of the regulatory performance
puzzle that is yet to be addressed.
There needs to be a dedicated
external agency appointed to monitor the
performance of regulatory agencies,
much like
shareholders and analysts do with publicly listed companies.
So the three pieces are a board governance model with
internal accountability,
a dedicated appointment agency to ensure we have
the skills on the boards of regulatory agencies we need,
and effective external monitoring.
And this bill only addresses the first of those,
and our submission is partly directed to
ensuring the first of those recommendations is
executed well, but also to raise the issue
of what the bill doesn't address, and that's appointment processes
and external monitoring.
On the
internal governance piece that the bill does address,
introducing a board governance model or a form of board
governance model,
we
commend the government for taking this approach,
but we think that there are two flaws in the model
adopted.
The first is that two commissioners will sit
on the governance board,
and
in a sense, that stops the governance board from being a proper
governance board.
It doesn't have the separation of executive
functions and governance functions
you'd expect from a governance board.
And we draw a distinction between this model and the one adopted for the
FMA, where the CEO of the FMA,
who is the principal executive exercising
regulatory decision-making powers,
does not sit on the FMA board,
and we think that model's to be preferred.
And we've addressed the bulk of our submission at that issue to
ensure a proper separation of governance
and regulatory decision-making
responsibilities.
This is adopting, in a way, the model of the Reserve
Bank board, where the governor continues to sit on the board,
and I think it would be fair to say we've seen some of the
problems-With that
model in the recent past.
So our first recommendation in relation to the model
adopted in the bill is that there be a proper separation of
governance responsibilities of the board
from the regulatory decision-making
powers of the commissioners, and that the chair of the
commissioners and the deputy chair not sit on the board.
A second issue with the
model adopted in the bill
is that we think there's not enough focus given on
competition expertise.
It's identified as one of eight
equally weighted qualifying fields alongside
knowledge of infrastructure, law, consumer affairs, and public
administration.
Yet the analytical core of merger clearances,
authorisations, and part four input methodologies under
the Act
and the market studies regime is competition
economics and competition law.
So we've recommended that the bill should require at least three
members
of the commissioner panel to have evidenced competition
economics expertise, and that any regulatory committee
dealing with Commerce Act matters under parts 2, 3, or
3A include such commissioners.
Oh, no, one final matter. There's a separate
matter addressed as our fifth submission
in our written submission, and that is unrelated to the
governance issue. It concerns the Commission's
market studies powers,
and it really relates to the connected
or parallel commerce promoting competition and other matters
bill, which I think is being addressed by a different select committee.
But the
Section 11 of this bill gives the Commission a broad new statutory
function to carry out reviews and studies of competition
and to recommend regulation.
Yet the National Act coalition agreement committed to
confining the Commission's market studies powers to
identifying regulatory barriers to entry.
So instead of confining the Commission's
market studies powers in accordance with the
coalition agreement, this bill and its
partner bill radically expand the Commission's market
studies powers. So we submit that Section
11 ( 1 )
cuts against the commitment in the coalition agreement
and should be narrowed to direct the Commission's study function towards
identifying regulatory policy and procurement barriers
to entry. And with that, I'll end and answer any
questions the committee has.
Thanks, Chair. First up, we've got Ariana Williams.
Thanks, Roger.
That's where I wanted to start,
your point in your submission about
the coalition agreement's focus on reducing regulatory barriers
to new entrants to drive competition.
Is it your view that that should be the role of the commission
more generally? The government hasn't undertaken any market studies, and the
criticism here seems to be that they're not focused enough on new entrants rather
than things like market power generally.
Yes. In relation to market studies, absolutely.
What's been revealed in successive market studies,
we felt initially that there was
no need for a market studies power.
It's popular around the OECD,
but it imposes great costs on business and
has traditionally yielded little light
on the state of competition in a market.
But one thing it has revealed is where regulatory
barriers are getting in the way of new entry.
And so we've submitted,
repeatedly, that the market studies power should be
narrowed to that purpose
so that we direct this very
powerful mechanism
to an issue that successive studies have shown
matter, and that is identifying barriers to entry.
Just on
your points around the appointment of commissioners
within the bodies and whether they should be commissioners,
or if they should be entirely externally appointed.
Do we run the risk there of
when the commission is undertaking
one of its functions, it has to have general
support in the market and to be seen as
a neutral player. Don't you think that appointing entirely outside in
appointments in a small New Zealand environment would mean that inevitably
everyone around the table had some sort of conflict?
I don't think so. And you can address that by appointing
retired people,
and
even the odd Australian expert,
who would be, I'm sure, willing to perform that role.
It's not proved a problem with the FMA having an
entirely independent board.
It's a very
similar or parallel regulatory regime,
similar level of complexity, similar level of wide market impact.
So I'm confident that
with-A clear focus on the
appointment process that you could address any conflict issue.
And of course,
there's a trade-off.
We've got a very poorly performing
regulatory agency,
and this is an opportunity to
improve its performance
by strengthening its governance.
And I think the greater threat is
that we compromise
the governance improvement
by-
I think what you've suggested-
By not separating the executive and governance responsibilities.
I think what you've suggested, Roger, runs the risk of making the
governance structure so bureaucratic as to lose its function within the
market. Don't you think that inviting
entirely
appointed members, and through the mechanism that you have
suggested, would greatly politicize the way
that the Commerce functions now?
I don't think so at all. It didn't when the FMA was formed,
and in the early days at least of the FMA in 2012.
It was hugely widely respected with good
quality appointments.
And of course, almost every company in the private sector
operates with a board that's separate from the executive
management.
So I
don't think there's anything
threatening
or challenging or demanding about
separating the executive and governance functions.
The problem is muddling them, and so that you don't have
an independent internal oversight body
reviewing the development of regulatory strategy
and reviewing its implementation.
Thanks, Roger. I'm just going a little bit over time, but I've got a question from
Deborah Russell.
Oh, I just want to clarify. So, first I'm just going to make a point,
just because the private sector does it doesn't make it a good thing.
That's a matter, it's an empirical thing on a case by case basis.
Or a bad thing.
Oh, it's an empirical matter on a case by case basis.
You just said successive surveys had found that the Commerce
Commission was not doing well, and then you mentioned the Productivity Commission
and two surveys by the New Zealand Initiative.
So what other surveys, and who were they surveying,
and who was responding to it? Where was that information coming
from?
The
three
investigations I'm referring are to the two we conducted and to the
earlier one by the-
All right. So it was, in fact then, it was just two from
the New Zealand Initiative and one from the Productivity Commission.
So it wasn't broad-based surveys or anything like that.
Well, they were both broad-based surveys, but yes.
Okay.
Those are the surveys I'm referring to.
Thank you.
Hey, thanks, Roger. We have met time, so appreciate your insights
and time today.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks, Roger.
Members, we've got Munro Diegemu
online.
Munro.
But Pat.
We should just keep on referring to him as the business roundtable.
That's a bit French. It'd be Duignall.
Good morning.
Good morning, Pat. We can hear you. We can't see you.
You can't see me? Oh, sorry, here's the video. Get it going.
Brilliant. That's fantastic. We've got you for 10 minutes, sir.
If you'd like to, please don't speak for the whole time, though, to save some room
for questions.
Oh.
Right. I'm speaking from Montreal as it happens.
Oh, bonjour. Comment ça va?
Bonjour. Ça va. They're very happy here because they defeated
a US team, Buffalo, in
ice skating last night. But then they're also
to the
Canadian Grand Prix, which I also hope to see.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the
committee.
This submission is based on my experience, which I will
outline briefly.
I was Director of Policy, Coordination, and Development for the
Treasury
a long time ago. I was General Manager of Finance for
Telecom,
Sparks predecessor. I've served two terms as
a commissioner at the Commission, and I'm currently
an expert lay member of the High Court for
Commerce Act matters. Because of the latter,
I have to just be careful with one or two things not to create a
conflict of interest.
I have given the secretariat a set of
slides,
and I hope that
you would have them in front of you.
Is that the case?
Yes.
Thank you.
I won't try to put the slides up because of the
technical complications, but if the committee have them, that's great.
Mm-hmm.
The first slide illustrates what I see as the key
issue,
and that is that in enacting, as it
presumably will, the associated
promoting competition and other matters amendment bill,
the parliament will strengthen the powers
of the commission considerably.As
always, in economic policy, achieving that
benefit will incur costs, and those costs include
inhibiting achievement of economies of scale and
inflicting compliance costs. I address this in my
submission in greater detail, including the
issue that New Zealand faces quite a difficult choice,
because unlike that of, say, the Scandinavian countries, we
don't have close markets,
which would enable us to achieve economies of scale,
nor have competition from them.
I believe, though, that the benefits will outweigh the
costs, because the Commission's exercise of its new powers
will be governed under this reformed structure that is
proposed.
I won't address
the New Zealand Initiative's views about
commissioner membership, but the committee will no doubt get advice
on that from other sources.
What I would like to do is to turn to my second slide, though,
which sets out my concept of the new governance
structure,
how it could work. It's
my words and Google Gemini's image
of a- ... air traffic controller who's
guiding airplanes, and of course, it
is the board that would be the controller,
and the pilot's equivalent is the
commissioners.
Mm.
And that I do indicate some of the pitfalls that have to
be avoided.
Now,
some submissions
on the Promoting Competition Bill have included concerns
regarding the proposed new powers.
One of them, which was highlighted by the last presentation,
was the self-initiated or
Commission-initiated market studies.
Now, my view on that is that that is a power
that it's appropriate to have, but that the
board, the new board, will need to
provide the government and Parliament with
explanations as to what its choices are regarding
where market studies are to be done,
and that I think that that is a
matter that I've suggested to the other committee dealing with
the Promoting Competition Bill, that it could
put into the act a requirement for the
board to report on that matter.
The second point is that
the... I will, could perhaps move on to my
third slide, and I will simply,
rather than go through these one at a time,
just put it to the committee that you can see there the roles
that I see for the overall
board.
I'll highlight one of them, which is that the Promoting Competition
Bill provides great secrecy powers
and also predatory pricing as a
new offense, or rather a variation
on the proof of it.
Those are areas where, again, the governing board
can
serve a very important purpose. In the case of
the information concealment which is required,
the board will be able to
basically satisfy the public that when
things have been redacted, that those redactions
do demonstrate that the decisions arrived at
on the basis of that redacted information are appropriate.
So,
with those remarks, I really just wanted to
highlight that I see this board as serving a very
important purpose,
but that I think that some of the concerns,
such as those that have been mentioned, but also in
submissions to the other committee, can be addressed
and will be addressed by this board.
Lastly,
I would just
like to
say that the
issue of the specialist commissioners has been raised,
the grocery commissioner and the telecom commissioner.
I have the greatest of respect for those commissioners.
I sat next to the
grocery commissioner at the Commission's conference just
last Thursday. But I must say that the
structure that's proposed is not compatible with separate
commissioner appointments
of that type, and that it is unfortunately true that a
previous telecom commissioner
submitted against the
fiber optic project,
whereas I and others on the Commission at the time disagreed
with that, but we had no way in which, in
reporting to a select committee just like this one,
for our view to be expressed. I'll stop there, Chair, to allow
for questions.
Thanks, Pat. I'm going to go to Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you, Pat, for your submission,
and enjoyed it at EDSI as well.
Just going to zero in a little bit about
predatory pricing, and you'll be aware that was large debate
atEconomic Development, Science and Innovation select committee on this
particular point, and one of the reasons was that a number of
submitters said that this is a bit of a blind alley.
It's so hard to prove.
And my question then is, should this be a key
part of what we're trying to achieve through the expansion of
market status, et cetera?
It's well-known in economics that predatory
pricing is a phenomenon that occurs,
but which is difficult to analyze in an
empirical sense as required for
regulation.
I think that
the officials, I suggest you quiz the
officials more closely on the matter,
because I can't do justice to that question in its
detail right now. What I would say
is that there's a mechanism called input
methodologies, which is where the, in the
part four, when part four was introduced in
2008, and I actually helped implement it, particularly the cost
of capital, but
that we do input methodologies or the commission
did input methodologies which were then scrutinized,
and that would be one way in which you could have
in the Act the piece that is there
regarding predatory pricing, but then require
the commission to explain itself and open itself
to a merits review by the courts.
Thank you.
Thank you. We're now going to go to Arina Williams.
Kia ora, Pat.
I want to ask you a high-level question.
Do you think,
thinking about the Commerce Commission's powers under part four,
many of the submissions focus on things like the market studies,
but the core regulation of things like electricity and
airports,
do you think that we are future-proofing the need for the
commission to
support the transition to a lower carbon economy?
Do you think the wider regulatory systems that the Commerce Commission has to
have oversight of, as well
as, yes, it has a focus on those competitive markets, but
it has a core function of how government
regulates and sets rules which are fair for consumers.
That's something that is losing a little bit of prominence
in the way that submitters have engaged with this.
Can you comment on
providing that level of regulatory certainty and predictability that
will continue to incentivize
investment as well?
Two thoughts.
One, as regards climate change and its
effects,
it's very important that the commission and the Electricity Authority
work
together,
which they did in my time.
But there is
perhaps a possibility of recognizing that in
legislation or across appointments.
Secondly,
as regards investment, the commission
has the difficult job, for example, with
gas networks at the moment, that it's got to be
phasing out those, since we are not going to
have enough gas, even leaving aside
LNG. And in doing so, it has
come to the conclusion it needed to impose
the cost on a
decreasing number of piped gas
users.
That was done in order to
assure investors in other industries
that the regulators would be
fair, shall we say. But it's a hard
road to have to go down. There's no
easy way, but the
need for investment does
imply that consumers are going
to sometimes be confronted with bills that are
unpopularly higher.
Thanks, Pat. That seems to be the end of our questions.
Mm.
I trust you have a good afternoon there in Montreal.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for tuning in.
And best for your
important role. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Au revoir.
Have a good evening.
Very good.
Members, we don't appear to have texts, so
I'd suggest we go have a break-
Okay
... until 1:00-ish.
Liam was saying there might be a lot of amendments potentially in the
house, so